# True Pioneers

Living monkeys can be split into two main groups based on their worldly distribution. There are the new world monkeys and the old world monkeys. Divided by the Atlantic Ocean, scientists used to think they must have shared a common ancestor that lived across the two continents when they were still united. But the genetic data just doesn't line up with this. It tells us that these two groups split only 35-40Ma. By that time, South America was not as far from Africa as it was today (it was about 1/3 closer), however there would have still been an entire ocean separating them. And whilst, there is evidence of island chains stretching out into the Atlantic, the closest was still some 800 km from the SA coast. And in fact, a recent paper concludes that island hopping was actually less likely than the alternative (Montheil et al., 2026). This alternative being yet another feat of ocean survival and traversal by our ancient primate relatives. Once again, scientists believe the frequent monsoons that assailed the coastline of West Africa at the time, may have dislodged a section of a riverbank, sweeping it and any unfortunate animals that may have been upon it, out into the open ocean. Yet even faced with a journey of 2000 km it seems at least one, or maybe, several voyages, made successful landfall. How strange it must have been for those ancient primates, finding themselves on a continent populated by giant sloths and armadillos, mammals that had been completely isolated from the rest of the world for tens of millions of years.